docs/troubleshooting.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Troubleshooting
---

# Troubleshooting
Sometimes things go wrong and Part-DB shows an error message. This page should help you to solve the problem.

## Error messages
When a common, easy fixable error occurs (like a non up-to-date database), Part-DB will show you some short instructions on how to fix the problem. If you have a problem that is not listed here, please open an issue on GitHub.

## General procedure
If you encounter an error, try the following steps:
* Clear cache of Part-DB with the console command: 
```bash
php bin/console cache:clear
```
* Check if the database needs an update (and perform it when needed) with the console command: 
```bash
php bin/console doctrine:migrations:migrate
```

If this does not help, please [open an issue on GitHub](https://github.com/Part-DB/Part-DB-symfony).

## Error logs
Detailed error logs can be found in the `var/log` directory.
When Part-DB is installed directly, the errors are written to the `var/log/prod.log` file.

When Part-DB is installed with Docker, the errors are written directly to the console output. 
You can see the logs with the following command, when you are in the folder with the `docker-compose.yml` file
```bash
docker-compose logs -f
```

Please include the error logs in your issue on GitHub, if you open an issue.

## Report Issue
If an error occurs, or you found a bug, please [open an issue on GitHub](https://github.com/Part-DB/Part-DB-symfony).

Commit message:

Update troubleshooting.md (#264)
* Update troubleshooting.md

Enhanced how to list users and reset a user's password.

* Update troubleshooting.md

---------

Co-authored-by: Jan Böhmer <mail@jan-boehmer.de>

docs/troubleshooting.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Troubleshooting
---

# Troubleshooting
Sometimes things go wrong and Part-DB shows an error message. This page should help you to solve the problem.

## Error messages
When a common, easy fixable error occurs (like a non up-to-date database), Part-DB will show you some short instructions on how to fix the problem. If you have a problem that is not listed here, please open an issue on GitHub.

## General procedure
If you encounter an error, try the following steps:
* Clear cache of Part-DB with the console command: 
```bash
php bin/console cache:clear
```
* Check if the database needs an update (and perform it when needed) with the console command: 
```bash
php bin/console doctrine:migrations:migrate
```

If this does not help, please [open an issue on GitHub](https://github.com/Part-DB/Part-DB-symfony).

## Search for user and reset password:
You can list all users with the following command: `php bin/console partdb:users:list`
To reset the password of a user you can use the following command: `php bin/console partdb:users:set-password [username]`


## Error logs
Detailed error logs can be found in the `var/log` directory.
When Part-DB is installed directly, the errors are written to the `var/log/prod.log` file.

When Part-DB is installed with Docker, the errors are written directly to the console output. 
You can see the logs with the following command, when you are in the folder with the `docker-compose.yml` file
```bash
docker-compose logs -f
```

Please include the error logs in your issue on GitHub, if you open an issue.

## Report Issue
If an error occurs, or you found a bug, please [open an issue on GitHub](https://github.com/Part-DB/Part-DB-symfony).
