---
layout: default
title: Import Bill of Material (BOM) for Projects
nav_order: 5
parent: Usage
---

# Import Bill of Material (BOM) for Projects

Part-DB supports the import of Bill of Material (BOM) files for projects. This allows you to directly import a BOM file
from your ECAD software into your Part-DB project.

The import process is currently semi-automatic. This means Part-DB will take the BOM file and create entries for all
parts in the BOM file in your project and assign fields like
mount names (e.g. 'C1, C2, C3'), quantity and more.
However, you still have to assign the parts from Part-DB database to the entries (if applicable) after the import by
hand,
as Part-DB can not know which part you had in mind when you designed your schematic.

## Usage

In the project view or edit click on the "Import BOM" button, below the BOM table. This will open a dialog where you can
select the BOM file you want to import and some options for the import process:

* **Type**: The format/type of the BOM file. See below for explanations of the different types.
* **Clear existing BOM entries before import**: If this is checked, all existing BOM entries, which are currently
  associated with the project, will be deleted before the import.

### Supported BOM file formats

* **KiCAD Pcbnew BOM (CSV file)**: A CSV file of the Bill of Material (BOM) generated
  by [KiCAD Pcbnew](https://www.kicad.org/).
  Please note that you have to export the BOM from the PCB editor, the BOM generated by the schematic editor (Eeschema)
  has a different format and does not work with this type.
  You can generate this BOM file by going to "File" -> "Fabrication Outputs" -> "Bill of Materials" in Pcbnew and save
  the file to your desired location.
* **KiCAD Schematic BOM (CSV file)**: A CSV file of the Bill of Material (BOM) generated
  by [KiCAD Eeschema](https://www.kicad.org/).
  You can generate this BOM file by going to "Tools" -> "Generate Bill of Materials" in Eeschema and save the file to your
  desired location. In the next step you can customize the mapping of the fields in Part-DB, if you have any special fields
  in your BOM to locate your fields correctly.
* **Generic CSV file**: A generic CSV file. You can use this option if you use some different ECAD software or wanna create
  your own CSV file. You will need to specify at least the designators, quantity and value fields in the CSV. In the next
  step you can customize the mapping of the fields in Part-DB, if you have any special fields in your BOM to locate your
  parts correctly.
