docs/usage/getting_started.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Getting started with Part-DB
nav_order: 4
---

# Getting started

After Part-DB you should begin with customizing the settings, and setting up the basic structures.
Before starting, it's useful to read a bit about the [concepts of Part-DB]({% link concepts.md %}).

1. TOC
{:toc}

## Customize config files

Before you start creating data structures, you should configure Part-DB to your needs by changing possible configuration
options.
This is done either via changing the `.env.local` file in a direct installation or by changing the env variables in
your `docker-compose.yaml` file.
A list of possible configuration options can be found [here]({% link configuration.md %}).

## Change password, Set up Two-Factor-Authentication & Customize User settings

If you have not already done so, you should change your user password. You can do this in the user settings (available in
the navigation bar drop-down with the user symbol).

![image]({% link assets/getting_started/change_password.png %})

There you can also find the option, to set up Two-Factor Authentication methods like Google Authenticator. Using this is
highly recommended (especially if you have admin permissions) to increase the security of your account. (Two-factor authentication 
even can be enforced for all members of a user group)

In the user settings panel, you can change account info like your username, your first and last name (which will be
shown alongside your username to identify you better), department information, and your email address. The email address
is used to send password reset mails if your system is configured to use this.

![image]({% link assets/getting_started/user_settings.png %})

In the configuration tab you can also override global settings, like your preferred UI language (which will
automatically be applied after login), the timezone you are in (and in which times will be shown for you), your
preferred currency (all money values will be shown converted to this to you, if possible) and the theme that should be
used.

## (Optional) Customize homepage banner

The banner which is shown on the homepage, can be customized/changed by changing the `config/banner.md` file with a text
editor. You can use markdown and (safe) HTML here, to style and customize the banner.
You can even use LaTeX-style equations by wrapping the expressions into `$` (like `$E=mc^2$`, which is rendered inline:
$E=mc^2$) or `$$` (like `$$E=mc^2$$`) which will be rendered as a block, like so: $$E=mc^2$$

## Create groups, users and customize permissions

### Users

When logged in as administrator, you can open the users menu in the `Tools` section of the sidebar
under `System -> Users`.
On this page you can create new users, change their passwords and settings, and change their permissions.
For each user who should use Part-DB you should set up their own account so that tracking of what user did works
properly.
![image]({% link assets/getting_started/user_admin.png %})

You should check the permissions for every user and ensure that they are in the intended way, and no user has more
permissions than he needs.
For each capability, you can choose between allow, forbid, and inherit. In the last case, the permission is determined by
the group a user has (if no group is chosen, it equals forbid)

![image]({% link assets/getting_started/user_permissions.png %})

### Anonymous user

The `anonymous` user is special, as its settings and permissions are used for everybody who is not logged in. By default,
the anonymous user has read capabilities for your parts. If your Part-DB instance is publicly available you maybe want
to restrict the permissions.

### Groups

If you have many users who should share the same permissions, it is useful to define the permissions using user
groups, which you can create and edit in the `System -> Groups` menu.

By default, 3 groups are defined:

* `readonly` which users only have read permissions (like viewing, searching parts, attachments, etc.)
* `users` which users also have rights to edit/delete/create elements
* `admin` which users can do administrative operations (like creating new users, showing global system log, etc.)

Users only use the setting of a capability from a group, if the user has a group associated and the capability on the
user is set to `inherit` (which is the default if creating a new user). You can override the permissions settings of a
group per user by explicitly setting the permission of the user.

Groups are organized as trees, meaning a group can have parent and child permissions and child groups can inherit
permissions from their parents.
To inherit the permissions from a parent group set the capability to inherit, otherwise, set it explicitly to override
the parents' permission.

## Create Attachment types

Every attachment (that is a file associated with a part, data structure, etc.) must have an attachment type. They can
be used to group attachments logically, like differentiating between datasheets, pictures, and other documents.

You can create/edit attachment types in the tools sidebar under "Edit -> Attachment types":

![image]({% link assets/getting_started/attachment_type_admin.png %})

Depending on your use case different entries here make sense. For part management the following (additional) entries may make sense:

* Datasheets (restricted to pdfs, Allowed filetypes: `application/pdf`)
* Pictures (for generic pictures of components, storage locations, etc., Allowed filetypes: `image/*`

For every attachment type a list of allowed file types, which can be uploaded to an attachment with this attachment
type, can be defined. You can either pass a list of allowed file extensions (e.g. `.pdf, .zip, .docx`) and/or a list
of [Mime Types](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Media_type) (e.g. `application/pdf, image/jpeg`) or a combination of both
here. To allow all browser-supported images, you can use `image/*` wildcard here.

## (Optional) Create Currencies

If you want to save price information for parts in a currency different from your global currency (by default Euro), you
have to define the additional currencies you want to use under `Edit -> Currencies`:

![image]({% link assets/getting_started/currencies_admin.png %})

You create a new currency, name it however you want (it is recommended to use the official name of the currency),
select the currency ISO code from the list, and save it. The currency symbol is determined automatically from the chosen ISO
code.
You can define an exchange rate in terms of your base currency (e.g. how many euros is one unit of your currency worth)
to convert the currency values in your preferred display currency automatically.

## (Optional) Create Measurement Units

By default, Part-DB assumes that the parts in inventory can be counted by individual indivisible pieces, like LEDs in a
box or books on a shelf.
However, if you want to manage things, that are divisible and the stock is described by a physical quantity, like
length for cables, or volumes of a liquid, you have to define additional measurement units.

This is possible under `Edit -> Measurement Units`:
![image]({% link assets/getting_started/units_admin.png %})

You can give the measurement unit a name and an optional unit symbol (like `m` for meters) which is shown when
quantities in this unit are displayed. The option `Use SI prefix` is useful for almost all physical quantities, as big
and small numbers are automatically formatted with SI prefixes (like 1.5kg instead 1500 grams).

The measurement unit can be selected for each part individually, by setting the option in the advanced tab of a part`s
edit menu.

## Create Categories

A category is used to group parts logically by their function (e.g. all NPN transistors would be put in a "
NPN-Transistors" category).
Categories are hierarchical structures meaning that you can create logical trees to group categories together.
See [Concepts]({% link concepts.md %}) for an example tree structure.

Creating/Editing categories is done in the tools sidebar under "Edit -> Categories".

Every part has to be assigned to a category, so you should create at least one category before you start adding parts.

## (Optional) Create Footprints

Footprints are used to describe the physical shape of a part, like a resistor or a capacitor.
They can be used to group parts by their physical shape and to find parts within the same package.

You can create/edit footprints in the tools sidebar under "Edit -> Footprints".

It is useful to create footprints for the most common packages, like SMD resistors, capacitors, etc. to make it easier
to find parts with the same footprint.
You should create these as a tree structure so that you can group footprints by their type.
See [Concepts]({% link concepts.md %}) for an example tree structure.

You can define attachments here which are associated with the footprint. The attachment set as the preview image, will be
used whenever a visual representation of the footprint is needed (e.g. in the part list).

For many common footprints, you can use the built-in footprints, which can be found in the "Builtin footprint image
gallery", which you can find in the "tools" menu.
Type the name of the image you want to use in the URL field of the attachment and select the image from the dropdown
menu.

## (Optional) Create Storage locations

A storage location represents a place where parts can be stored.

You can create/edit storage locations in the tools sidebar under "Edit -> Storage locations".

## (Optional) Create Manufacturers and suppliers

You can create/edit [manufacturers]({% link concepts.md %}#manufacturers) and [suppliers]({% link concepts.md
%}#suppliers) in the tools sidebar under "Edit -> Manufacturers" and "Edit -> Suppliers".

## Create parts

You are now ready to create your first part. You can do this by clicking either by clicking "Edit -> New Part" in the
tools sidebar tree
or by clicking the "Create new Part" above the (empty) part list, after clicking on one of your newly created
categories.

You will be presented with a form where you can enter the basic information about your part:

![image]({% link assets/getting_started/new_part.png %})

You have to enter at least a name for the part and choose a category for it, the other fields are optional.
However, it is recommended to fill out as much information as possible, as this will make it easier to find the part
later.

You can choose from your created datastructures to add manufacturer information, supplier information, etc. to the part.
You can also create new datastructures on the fly, if you want to add additional information to the part, by typing the
name of the new datastructure in the field and select the "New ..." option in the dropdown menu. See [tips]({% link
usage/tips_tricks.md %}) for more information.

Commit message:

Document system settings in getting_started guide

docs/usage/getting_started.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Getting started with Part-DB
nav_order: 4
---

# Getting started

After Part-DB you should begin with customizing the settings, and setting up the basic structures.
Before starting, it's useful to read a bit about the [concepts of Part-DB]({% link concepts.md %}).

1. TOC
{:toc}

## Customize system settings

Before starting creating datastructures, you should check the system settings to ensure that they fit your needs.
After login as an administrator, you can find the settings in the sidebar under `Tools -> System -> Settings`.
![image]({% link assets/getting_started/system_settings.png %})

Here you can change various settings, like the name of your Part-DB instance (which is shown in the title bar of the
browser), the default language (which is used if no user preference is set), the default timezone (which is used to
display times correctly), the default currency (which is used to display prices correctly), and many more.

Some more fundamental settings like database connection, mail server settings, SSO, etc. are configured via environment variables.
Environment variables also allow to overwrite various settings from the web interface.
Environment variables can be changed by editing the `.env.local` file in a direct installation or by changing the env variables in
your `docker-compose.yaml` file.
A list of possible configuration options can be found [here]({% link configuration.md %}).

## Change password, Set up Two-Factor-Authentication & Customize User settings

If you have not already done so, you should change your user password. You can do this in the user settings (available in
the navigation bar drop-down with the user symbol).

![image]({% link assets/getting_started/change_password.png %})

There you can also find the option, to set up Two-Factor Authentication methods like Google Authenticator. Using this is
highly recommended (especially if you have admin permissions) to increase the security of your account. (Two-factor authentication 
even can be enforced for all members of a user group)

In the user settings panel, you can change account info like your username, your first and last name (which will be
shown alongside your username to identify you better), department information, and your email address. The email address
is used to send password reset mails if your system is configured to use this.

![image]({% link assets/getting_started/user_settings.png %})

In the configuration tab you can also override global settings, like your preferred UI language (which will
automatically be applied after login), the timezone you are in (and in which times will be shown for you), your
preferred currency (all money values will be shown converted to this to you, if possible) and the theme that should be
used.

## (Optional) Customize homepage banner

The banner which is shown on the homepage, can be customized/changed via the homepage banner setting in system settings. 
You can use markdown and (safe) HTML here, to style and customize the banner.
You can even use LaTeX-style equations by wrapping the expressions into `$` (like `$E=mc^2$`, which is rendered inline:
$E=mc^2$) or `$$` (like `$$E=mc^2$$`) which will be rendered as a block, like so: $$E=mc^2$$

## Create groups, users and customize permissions

### Users

When logged in as administrator, you can open the users menu in the `Tools` section of the sidebar
under `System -> Users`.
On this page you can create new users, change their passwords and settings, and change their permissions.
For each user who should use Part-DB you should set up their own account so that tracking of what user did works
properly.
![image]({% link assets/getting_started/user_admin.png %})

You should check the permissions for every user and ensure that they are in the intended way, and no user has more
permissions than he needs.
For each capability, you can choose between allow, forbid, and inherit. In the last case, the permission is determined by
the group a user has (if no group is chosen, it equals forbid)

![image]({% link assets/getting_started/user_permissions.png %})

### Anonymous user

The `anonymous` user is special, as its settings and permissions are used for everybody who is not logged in. By default,
the anonymous user has read capabilities for your parts. If your Part-DB instance is publicly available you maybe want
to restrict the permissions.

### Groups

If you have many users who should share the same permissions, it is useful to define the permissions using user
groups, which you can create and edit in the `System -> Groups` menu.

By default, 3 groups are defined:

* `readonly` which users only have read permissions (like viewing, searching parts, attachments, etc.)
* `users` which users also have rights to edit/delete/create elements
* `admin` which users can do administrative operations (like creating new users, showing global system log, etc.)

Users only use the setting of a capability from a group, if the user has a group associated and the capability on the
user is set to `inherit` (which is the default if creating a new user). You can override the permissions settings of a
group per user by explicitly setting the permission of the user.

Groups are organized as trees, meaning a group can have parent and child permissions and child groups can inherit
permissions from their parents.
To inherit the permissions from a parent group set the capability to inherit, otherwise, set it explicitly to override
the parents' permission.

## Create Attachment types

Every attachment (that is a file associated with a part, data structure, etc.) must have an attachment type. They can
be used to group attachments logically, like differentiating between datasheets, pictures, and other documents.

You can create/edit attachment types in the tools sidebar under "Edit -> Attachment types":

![image]({% link assets/getting_started/attachment_type_admin.png %})

Depending on your use case different entries here make sense. For part management the following (additional) entries may make sense:

* Datasheets (restricted to pdfs, Allowed filetypes: `application/pdf`)
* Pictures (for generic pictures of components, storage locations, etc., Allowed filetypes: `image/*`

For every attachment type a list of allowed file types, which can be uploaded to an attachment with this attachment
type, can be defined. You can either pass a list of allowed file extensions (e.g. `.pdf, .zip, .docx`) and/or a list
of [Mime Types](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Media_type) (e.g. `application/pdf, image/jpeg`) or a combination of both
here. To allow all browser-supported images, you can use `image/*` wildcard here.

## (Optional) Create Currencies

If you want to save price information for parts in a currency different from your global currency (by default Euro), you
have to define the additional currencies you want to use under `Edit -> Currencies`:

![image]({% link assets/getting_started/currencies_admin.png %})

You create a new currency, name it however you want (it is recommended to use the official name of the currency),
select the currency ISO code from the list, and save it. The currency symbol is determined automatically from the chosen ISO
code.
You can define an exchange rate in terms of your base currency (e.g. how many euros is one unit of your currency worth)
to convert the currency values in your preferred display currency automatically.

## (Optional) Create Measurement Units

By default, Part-DB assumes that the parts in inventory can be counted by individual indivisible pieces, like LEDs in a
box or books on a shelf.
However, if you want to manage things, that are divisible and the stock is described by a physical quantity, like
length for cables, or volumes of a liquid, you have to define additional measurement units.

This is possible under `Edit -> Measurement Units`:
![image]({% link assets/getting_started/units_admin.png %})

You can give the measurement unit a name and an optional unit symbol (like `m` for meters) which is shown when
quantities in this unit are displayed. The option `Use SI prefix` is useful for almost all physical quantities, as big
and small numbers are automatically formatted with SI prefixes (like 1.5kg instead 1500 grams).

The measurement unit can be selected for each part individually, by setting the option in the advanced tab of a part`s
edit menu.

## Create Categories

A category is used to group parts logically by their function (e.g. all NPN transistors would be put in a "
NPN-Transistors" category).
Categories are hierarchical structures meaning that you can create logical trees to group categories together.
See [Concepts]({% link concepts.md %}) for an example tree structure.

Creating/Editing categories is done in the tools sidebar under "Edit -> Categories".

Every part has to be assigned to a category, so you should create at least one category before you start adding parts.

## (Optional) Create Footprints

Footprints are used to describe the physical shape of a part, like a resistor or a capacitor.
They can be used to group parts by their physical shape and to find parts within the same package.

You can create/edit footprints in the tools sidebar under "Edit -> Footprints".

It is useful to create footprints for the most common packages, like SMD resistors, capacitors, etc. to make it easier
to find parts with the same footprint.
You should create these as a tree structure so that you can group footprints by their type.
See [Concepts]({% link concepts.md %}) for an example tree structure.

You can define attachments here which are associated with the footprint. The attachment set as the preview image, will be
used whenever a visual representation of the footprint is needed (e.g. in the part list).

For many common footprints, you can use the built-in footprints, which can be found in the "Builtin footprint image
gallery", which you can find in the "tools" menu.
Type the name of the image you want to use in the URL field of the attachment and select the image from the dropdown
menu.

## (Optional) Create Storage locations

A storage location represents a place where parts can be stored.

You can create/edit storage locations in the tools sidebar under "Edit -> Storage locations".

## (Optional) Create Manufacturers and suppliers

You can create/edit [manufacturers]({% link concepts.md %}#manufacturers) and [suppliers]({% link concepts.md
%}#suppliers) in the tools sidebar under "Edit -> Manufacturers" and "Edit -> Suppliers".

## Create parts

You are now ready to create your first part. You can do this by clicking either by clicking "Edit -> New Part" in the
tools sidebar tree
or by clicking the "Create new Part" above the (empty) part list, after clicking on one of your newly created
categories.

You will be presented with a form where you can enter the basic information about your part:

![image]({% link assets/getting_started/new_part.png %})

You have to enter at least a name for the part and choose a category for it, the other fields are optional.
However, it is recommended to fill out as much information as possible, as this will make it easier to find the part
later.

You can choose from your created datastructures to add manufacturer information, supplier information, etc. to the part.
You can also create new datastructures on the fly, if you want to add additional information to the part, by typing the
name of the new datastructure in the field and select the "New ..." option in the dropdown menu. See [tips]({% link
usage/tips_tricks.md %}) for more information.
